Add a System.Text.Json threat model doc (#50541)
dotnet/runtime: src/libraries/System.Text.Json/docs/ThreatModel.md

Unreasonably deeply nested JSON may be constructed to exhaust stack space on the machine performing deserialization. If unguarded against, this may cause the application process to crash, possibly resulting in a denial of service.

#### Mitigation

The reader has a `MaxDepth` property with a default value of 64 to avoid recursing too deep in JSON. The deserializer also has a `JsonSerializerOptions.MaxDepth` property (same default of 64) that is passed to the reader to configure the reader’s `MaxDepth`. The serializer assumes the reader will throw and thus does not check the value itself. The serializer uses the same `MaxDepth` for both serialization and deserialization. During serialization, the serializer does need to check against the `MaxDepth` since the writer does not have a configurable max. However, the writer does have a fail-safe limit of 1,000 depth which means a `MaxDepth` setting of > 1000 is not honored during serialization but is honored during deserialization.

### Threat: Algorithmic complexity attacks

Algorithmic complexity attacks have been considered as part of the design of `JsonSerializer`.

#### Mitigations

> There are no known mechanisms by where crafting JSON can cause runtime complexities such the deserializer doing more work than the adversary had to do. That is, given a payload of length _n_ bytes, the total amount of work performed and memory allocated by `Utf8JsonReader` and `JsonSerializer.Deserialize` will be bounded by `O(n)`. There are no unmitigated `O(n^2)` or higher complexity algorithms in the deserialization routines.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is no known way to craft JSON that can cause the deserializer to do more work than the adversary had to do. That is, given a payload of length _n_ bytes, the total amount of work performed and memory allocated by `Utf8JsonReader` and `JsonSerializer.Deserialize` will be bounded by `O(n)`. There are no unmitigated `O(n^2)` or higher complexity algorithms in the deserialization routines.
```

### Threat: Loading `System.Type`s based on untrusted user data

> Loading unintended types may have significant consequences, whether the type is malicious or just has security-sensitive side effects. A type may contain exploitable security vulnerability, perform security-sensitive actions in its instance or `static` constructor, have a large memory footprint that facilitates DoS attacks, or may throw non-recoverable exceptions. Types may have `static` constructors that run as soon as the type is loaded and before any instances are created. For these reasons, it is important to control the set of types that the deserializer may load.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Loading unintended types may have significant consequences, whether the type is malicious or just has security-sensitive side effects. A type may contain an exploitable security vulnerability, perform security-sensitive actions in its instance or `static` constructor, have a large memory footprint that facilitates DoS attacks, or may throw non-recoverable exceptions. Types may have `static` constructors that run as soon as the type is loaded and before any instances are created. For these reasons, it is important to control the set of types that the deserializer may load.
```

### Threat: Deserialized instances being in an unintended state

An instance of a type or an instantiated object graph may have internal consistency constraints that must be enforced. Care must be taken to avoid breaking these constraints during deserialization.

#### Mitigation

This situation can be avoided by being aware of the following points:

- Constructors run when `JsonSerializer.Deserialize` deserializes POCOs. Therefore, logic in constructors may participate in state management of the deserialized instance.

- If necessitated by your deserialization scenario, use callbacks to ensure that the object is in a valid state. This is not yet a first-class feature in the serializer, but a workaround is described in the [How to migrate from Newtonsoft.Json to System.Text.Json document](https://docs.microsoft.com/dotnet/standard/serialization/system-text-json-migrate-from-newtonsoft-how-to#callbacks). Be aware that this workaround potentially degrades performance.

> - Where applicable, consider validating objects graphs deserialized from untrusted data sources before processing it. Each individual object may be in a consistent state, but the object graph as a whole may not be.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Where applicable, consider validating an object graph deserialized from untrusted data sources before processing it. Each individual object may be in a consistent state, but the object graph as a whole may not be.
```

Reviewer 2: Keeping plural seems better given we have "data sources"

Reviewer: But then the following "it" would have to change  to "them", and plural is also out of sync with the following sentence, which uses the singular -- "the object graph as a whole".  The plural "sources" seems to be a reference to "each individual object" rather than "the object graph".

Reviewer 2: That works

Author: Thanks

By default, the `JsonSerializer` and `Utf8JsonReader` strictly honor the [RFC 8259 specification](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc8259). When enabling non-RFC-compliant behaviors (such as permitting single or multi-line comments when reading JSON), different deserializers may interpret incoming payloads differently. This could result in two different deserializers reading the exact same payload but populating an object's members with different values. This may have security implications for distributed systems. For example, if a validating frontend uses one deserializer but the backend system uses a different deserializer, this may present an opportunity for an adversary to craft a payload which appears safe when seen by the frontend but which is malicious when deserialized by the backend.

#### Mitigation

- The `Utf8JsonReader`, `Utf8JsonWriter`, and `JsonSerializer` types adhere to the [RFC 8259 specification](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc8259) by default, requiring the input and output payloads follow the standard formatting for strings, numbers, lists, and objects. Payloads that don't conform will cause a clear `JsonException` to be thrown when reading.

> - Avoid writing custom converters incorrectly, particularly for serialization.

Reviewer 3: Serialization is a bit weird here imho
The threat description is about malicious payloads, meaning deserialization. Then it starts with serialization and that it is limited to nesting and rfc compliance etc and describes that it is a threat to ``Deserialize``
The mitigation then describes ... particularly for **serialization**. I would have expected that **deserialization** is the offender here where my extra smart code is doing not so smart code (collisions, etc., similar to the stuff that was listed before).  If serialization is the big threat to my own code written with custom converters, then the description above does not make it clear to me.

The second mitigation step about understanding how processing is fine.

Reviewer 2: Well it's probably both, serialization here, to my mind, covers both. So both could be mentioned, rather than just changing it to deserialization.

Reviewer 4: The way I interpreted this was "avoid writing serialization converters that produce non-standard output and thus require the receiver to opt in to potentially dangerous behaviors." But perhaps the wording can be cleaned up a bit to better describe how both serializers and deserializers need to play well w.r.t. standards-compliance?

Author: > "avoid writing serialization converters that produce non-standard output and thus require the receiver to opt in to potentially dangerous behaviors."

Yup this is what I was trying to say. I've updated the bullet, and added another one for guidance on deserialization converters.

If an options instance is not passed to the serializer, a default options instance is internally created and cached as a static variable. This means the warm-up phase is only performed once for every type when using the default options instance.

### Threat: Memory exhaustion due to (de)serializing numerous types

`JsonSerializer` creates and caches metadata for each unique type that is passed to it as an input (along with serializable types in their object graphs). This metadata is cached on the default `JsonSerializerOptions` instance, or in custom instances that are passed to the serializer. Serializing and deserializing numerous types, for example, multiple anonymous types or types created with reflection, can cause memory to be exhausted due to all the metadata being cached.

#### Mitigation

Be sure to maintain an upper bound to the number of types being passed to `JsonSerializer`, for both serialization and deserialization. For example, if implementing an API backend, do not accidentally create throwaway (dynamically generated) types per request to represent response data to be serialized and returned to the client.

### Threat: Elevation of privilege

> `JsonSerializer` makes no trust decisions, so there's no potential risk due to accident elevation of privilege. Systems built on top of JSON serialization such as ASP.NET Core's type serialization and custom user libraries need to determine security considerations for input and output data processed by the `JsonSerializer`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`JsonSerializer` makes no trust decisions, so there's no potential risk due to accidental elevation of privilege. Systems built on top of JSON serialization such as ASP.NET Core's type serialization and custom user libraries need to determine security considerations for input and output data processed by the `JsonSerializer`.
```

 - When writing, `JsonSerializer` and `Utf8JsonWriter` escape all non-ASCII characters by default to provide defense-in-depth protections against cross-site scripting (XSS) or information-disclosure attacks. HTML-sensitive characters, such as `<`, `>`, `&`, and `'` are escaped as well. We provide an option to override the default behavior by specifying a custom `System.Text.Encodings.Web.JavaScriptEncoder`.

     `JavaScriptEncoder.UnsafeRelaxedJsonEscaping`, a built-in, more permissive encoder is provided. It doesn't escape HTML-sensitive characters or offer additional defense-in-depth protections against XSS or information-disclosure attacks. It should only be used when it is known that the client will be interpreting the resulting payload as UTF-8 encoded JSON. Never allow the output of `UnsafeRelaxedJsonEscaping` to be emitted into an HTML page or a `<script>` element.

> - When deserializing, properties are processed in the order specified by the input payload. When serializing, properties are written according to the non-deterministic order returned when fetching the properties of a POCO with reflection. Do not rely on a specific property ordering of JSON when deserialzing, or on a specific order when serializing. If a feature to specify serialization order is implemented in the serializer, assumptions based on ordering may then be utilized safely.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- When deserializing, properties are processed in the order specified by the input payload. When serializing, properties are written according to the non-deterministic order returned when fetching the properties of a POCO with reflection. Do not rely on a specific property ordering of JSON when deserializing, or on a specific order when serializing. If a feature to specify serialization order is implemented in the serializer, assumptions based on ordering may then be utilized safely.
```
